Cyclistic Case Study

This was my final project for my Google Data Analytics Professional Certificate.


The dataset being used is from a real company called Divvy that provides this data to Google under a scholastic license. The project is setup as a fictional bike-sharing company called Cyclistic.
Cyclistic has free and premium users, with different options of bicycles including bikes for those with disabilities.
I was tasked with answering the question: "How do annual members and casual riders use Cyclistic bikes differently?"

I started by gathering the data first. The data was provided in .csv format by the month and year. Since I was doing this project in October, I grabbed the last 12 months starting from October of 2023 to September of 2024.

Once I had my data I began cleaning it and formatting it in excel. This included removing duplicates, removing null values, as well as using the pickup and drop-off times to add a "ride_length" column. I also knew that I would eventually want to make a nice looking map in Tableau so formatting the longitude and latitude rows so Tableau could easily read it was a must.

I then began doing some exploratory analysis on the data focusing on the busiest months of each season to get an idea of the behaviors year round. I did this partly in Excel using pivot tables and partly in MySQL as well. The Scripts for MySQL are available for review in this portfolio.

I discovered that casual members average ride length is more than double that of members, with casual riders taking their longest rides on the weekend.

In regards to total rides done by casual riders and member riders, member rides account for more than half of all rides by the company.

This points to casual members using Cyclistic bikes as more of a leisure activity, taking long though infrequent trips. Members however, use the bikes for shorter, more frequent trips most likely to and from work. This holds true as I also discovered that the busiest days for casual riders are the weekends and the inverse is true for members.

There are outliers of course. Many members use Cyclistic bikes in both ways, as a leisure activity and as transportation. However, the data overwhelmingly suggests that the majority of riders fall under the following characterization:

Casual Riders: Longer, infrequent trips for leisure.
Member Riders: Shorter, more frequent trips for transportation.
